
## Python 3 vs Python 2

Python 3 is much newer, and Python 2 reached "end if life" on January 1, 2020. So, unless you're working on a code which was written a long ago in the past, you're gonna use the latest Python 3. Python is actually a specification of language that can be implemented in many ways.
## Implementations of Python

When people speak of _Python_ they often mean not just the language but also the CPython implementation.

There are various implementations of python:
1. CPython
2. PyPy
3. Jyton
4. IronPython
5. PythonNet

#### CPython[](https://docs.python-guide.org/starting/which-python/#cpython "Permalink to this headline")

[CPython](http://www.python.org) is the reference implementation of Python, written in C. It compiles Python code to intermediate bytecode which is then interpreted by a virtual machine. CPython provides the highest level of compatibility with Python packages and C extension modules.

Python is a Dynamically typed language, meaning that the data types of the variable are assigned on runtime, and are based off the type of data the variable hold. Data types of variables don't have to be explicitly mentioned while initialization.

## Modules

You can import modules using the ```import ``` or ```from ... import``` statement.

As soon as you use import statements, you use modules. These can be either built-in modules such as *os* and *sys*, third-party modules you have installed in your environment, or your project’s internal modules.

Built-in modules:
1. os
2. sys

Don’t namespace with underscores; use submodules instead.

```
# OK
import library.plugin.foo
# not OK
import library.foo_plugin
```

To keep in line with the style guide, keep module names short, lowercase, and be sure to avoid using special symbols like the dot (.) or question mark (?). A file name like `my.spam.py` is the one you should avoid! Naming this way will interfere with the way Python looks for modules. In the case of my.spam.py Python expects to find a `spam.py` file in a folder named `my` which is not the case.

An `import modu` statement will look for the proper file, which is `modu.py` in the same directory as the caller, if it exists. If it is not found, the Python interpreter will search for `modu.py` in the “path” recursively and raise an ImportError exception when it is not found.

When `modu.py` is found, the Python interpreter will ***execute the module in an isolated scope***. Any top-level statement in `modu.py` will be executed, including other imports if any. Function and class definitions are stored in the module’s dictionary.

Then, the module’s variables, functions, and classes will be available to the caller through the module’s namespace, a central concept in programming that is particularly helpful and powerful in Python.

In many languages, an `include file` directive is used by the preprocessor to take all code found in the file and ‘copy’ it into the caller’s code. It is different in Python: the included code is isolated in a module namespace, which means that you generally don’t have to worry that the included code could have unwanted effects, e.g. override an existing function with the same name.

It is possible to simulate the more standard behavior by using a special syntax of the import statement: `from modu import *`. This is generally considered bad practice. **Using** `import *` **makes the code harder to read and makes dependencies less compartmentalized**.

Using `from modu import func` is a way to pinpoint the function you want to import and put it in the local namespace. While much less harmful than `import *` because it shows explicitly what is imported in the local namespace, its only advantage over a simpler `import modu` is that it will save a little typing.

```
# Very bad

[...]
from modu import *
[...]
x = sqrt(4)  # Is sqrt part of modu? A builtin? Defined above?

# Better

from modu import sqrt
[...]
x = sqrt(4)  # sqrt may be part of modu, if not redefined in between

# Best

import modu
[...]
```

## Packages

Python provides a very straightforward packaging system, which is simply an extension of the module mechanism to a directory.

Any directory with an `__init__.py` file is considered a Python package. The different modules in the package are imported in a similar manner as plain modules, but with a special behavior for the `__init__.py` file, which is used to gather all package-wide definitions.

A file `modu.py` in the directory `pack/` is imported with the statement `import pack.modu`. This statement will look for `__init__.py` file in `pack` and execute all of its top-level statements. Then it will look for a file named `pack/modu.py` and execute all of its top-level statements. After these operations, any variable, function, or class defined in `modu.py` is available in the pack.modu namespace.

A commonly seen issue is adding too much code to `__init__.py` files. When the project complexity grows, there may be sub-packages and sub-sub-packages in a deep directory structure. In this case, importing a single item from a sub-sub-package will require executing all `__init__.py` files met while traversing the tree.

Leaving an `__init__.py` file empty is considered normal and even good practice, if the package’s modules and sub-packages do not need to share any code.

Lastly, a convenient syntax is available for importing deeply nested packages: `import very.deep.module as mod`. This allows you to use mod in place of the verbose repetition of `very.deep.module`.







